---
layout: post
title: Remote Accessing Raspberry PI
category: Raspberry PI
---

### Introduction
In this article we will look at accessing Raspberry PI remotely

### Testing SSH
openssh-server is insalled by default on raspbian installation
ssh client is installed by default on most linux distribution

test the ssh connection

> ssh -X  192.168.1.4 -l pi

where 192.168.1.4 is IP Address of Raspberry PI

This will give remote terminal access to Raspberry PI

### Graphical Access
X is an architecture-independent system for remote graphical user interfaces and input device capabilities

X uses a client–server model: an X server communicates with various client programs. The server accepts requests for graphical output (windows) and sends back user input (from keyboard, mouse, or touchscreen). Each person using a networked terminal has the ability to interact with the display with any type of user input device.

X provides display and I/O services to applications, so it is a server; applications use these services, thus they are clients.The X client sends commands to the X Server about what kind of things to put on the screen and the X server does it

The X server will run on the host machine while X server client will run on the Raspberry PI
Let us consider a hostmachine running Ubuntu12.04 and Raspberry PI running raspbian OS.

The X window system introduces a abstraction  for graphical display and input devices .One can run a program on the X client and have all the graphical bit appear on the screen of the X Server somewhere else on the network. As long as X window communication protocols are followed display for any  client can be rendered on any server irrespective of whether host/client machine run the same operating systems,have same architecture etc

This is particularly useful because this removes a large amount of processor demand from the Raspberry PI for rendering.Also Input devices need not be connected to the PI directly as input device commands are passed for host X Server to the X Client machine.

The most common X Window standard used presently is called X11.

The X11 Server needs to be installed on the server (Ubuntu12.04 ) while X11 client needs to be installed on the Raspberry PI .

By default X11 server and clients are installed on most linux and Raspberry PI compatible linux distributions.

### X11 Forwarding for GUI Application over SSH
The first method is to use X switch

To enable the use of X commands forwarding,we need to enable the feature on Raspberry PI

Open sshd config file with a text editor.

> $ sudo vi /etc/ssh/sshd_config

Add the following line in the bottom line of the configuration file.

>X11Forwarding yes

Restart sshd

>$ sudo /etc/init.d/ssh restart

 connect to Raspberry Pi over SSH with "-X" option.
> ssh -X 192.168.1.4 -l pi  
> leafpad

The command uses the X switch to tell ssh to send the X commands to the X server on your host.

The window corresponding to the application `leafpad` will be rendered on Ubuntu12.04
Thus we can access graphicall application on Raspberry PI remotely

### X11 Forwarding for Desktop over SSH
Another option is to get the complete desktop instead of Window for specific application

On ubuntu the desktop session is running on virtual terminal 7 which can be accessed by typing 
CTRL+ALT+F7

we can run the remote RPi desktop in the a virtual terminal  via X11 forwarding
change to root user.

>$ sudo su

The xinit program allows a user to manually start an X display server.
> $ xinit -- :1 &

This will start a X display server session on virtual termnial 8 on Ubuntu 12.04 OS which can be accessed by  typing CTRL+ALT+F8 .You can switch back to the original terminal  by pressing CTRL+ALT+F7.

>$DISPLAY=:1 ssh -X pi@192.168.2.5 lxsession

After switching to virtual terminal 8, the following command will launch the Raspberry PI desktop remotely. 

You can move between first and second virtual terminals by pressing CTRL+ALT+F7 or CTRL+ALT+F8.

