---
layout: post
title: MBED Setup Documentation
category: Embedded Firmware
---

> **MBED Setup** 

###**Prerequisites**

Mbed test suite and build scripts are Python 2.7 applications and require Python 2.7 runtime environment and [setuptools](https://pythonhosted.org/an_example_pypi_project/setuptools.html) to install dependencies.

* Install [Python 2.7](https://www.python.org/download/releases/2.7) programming language.
* Install [setuptools](https://pythonhosted.org/an_example_pypi_project/setuptools.html#installing-setuptools-and-easy-install) 
* Optionally you can install [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest/installing.html) which is the PyPA recommended tool for installing Python packages from command line.

Mbed SDK in its repo root directory specifies `setup.py` file which holds information about all packages which are dependencies for it. 

First, clone mbed SDK repo and go to mbed SDk repo's directory:

- Download mbed sources https://github.com/mbedmicro/mbed

	From a command line with Git installed, run the following command in a directory where you wish mbed to be stored:
		
	> $ git clone https://github.com/mbedmicro/mbed.git

**Installing Tools**
	
Second, invoke ```setup.py``` so ```setuptools``` can install mbed SDK's dependencies (external Python modules required by mbed SDK):

```
$ python setup.py install
```
or 
```
$ sudo python setup.py install
```
when your system requires administrator rights to install new Python packages.

### **Manual Python package dependency installation**
In case you do not want to install whole mbed package using ```setuptools```, you can use ```requirements.txt``` 
file and with help of ```pip`` package manager install only mbed's Python package dependencies:
```
$ pip install -r requirements.txt
```

###**Download and Install GCC ARM ToolChain**

 - Download toolchain for [gcc-arm-none-eabi-4_9-2015q](https://launchpad.net/gcc-arm-embedded/4.9/4.9-2015-q1-update/+download/gcc-arm-none-eabi-4_9-2015q1-20150306-linux.tar.bz2) 
 - Or Follow the instructions at [here](https://launchpad.net/~terry.guo/+archive/ubuntu/gcc-arm-embedded)

For example, if you want to change the path to your GNU Tools for ARM Embedded Processors to a path like `c:/arm_gcc/bin`, you simply need to have a `workspace_tools/private_settings.py` that contains following line:

	> GCC_ARM_PATH = "c:/arm_gcc/bin"


### **Workspace tools**

Workspace tools are set of Python scripts used off-line by Mbed SDK team to:

* Compile and build mbed SDK,
* Compile and build libraries included in mbed SDK repo like e.g. ETH (Ethernet), USB, RTOS or CMSIS,
* Compile, build and run mbed SDK tests,
* Run test regression locally and in CI server,
* Get library, target, test configuration (paths, parameters, names etc.).

### **Configure workspace tools to work with your compilers**

we need to tell workspace tools where our compilers are.

* Go ```mbed/workspace_tools/``` directory and create empty file called ```private_settings.py```.
```
$ touch private_settings.py
```
* Populate this file the Python code below: 
```python
from os.path import join
 
# ARMCC
ARM_PATH = "C:/Work/toolchains/ARMCompiler_5.03_117_Windows"
ARM_BIN = join(ARM_PATH, "bin")
ARM_INC = join(ARM_PATH, "include")
ARM_LIB = join(ARM_PATH, "lib")
 
ARM_CPPLIB = join(ARM_LIB, "cpplib")
MY_ARM_CLIB = join(ARM_PATH, "lib", "microlib")
 
# GCC ARM
GCC_ARM_PATH = "C:/Work/toolchains/gcc_arm_4_8/4_8_2013q4/bin"
 
# GCC CodeSourcery
GCC_CS_PATH = "C:/Work/toolchains/Sourcery_CodeBench_Lite_for_ARM_EABI/bin"
 
# GCC CodeRed
GCC_CR_PATH = "C:/Work/toolchains/LPCXpresso_6.1.4_194/lpcxpresso/tools/bin"
 
# IAR
IAR_PATH = "C:/Work/toolchains/iar_6_5/arm"
 
SERVER_ADDRESS = "127.0.0.1"
LOCALHOST = "127.0.0.1"
 
# This is moved to separate JSON configuration file used by singletest.py
MUTs = {
}
```

Note: You need to provide the absolute path to your compiler(s) installed on your host machine. Replace corresponding variable values with paths to compilers installed in your system:

* ```ARM_PATH``` for armcc compiler.
* ```GCC_ARM_PATH``` for GCC ARM compiler.
* ```GCC_CS_PATH``` for GCC CodeSourcery compiler.
* ```GCC_CR_PATH``` for GCC CodeRed compiler.
* ```IAR_PATH``` for IAR compiler. 

If for example you do not use ```IAR``` compiler you do not have to modify anything. Workspace tools will use ```IAR_PATH`` variable only if you explicit ask for it from command line. So do not worry and replace only paths for your installed compilers.

For example:

```python
ARM_PATH = "C:/Work/toolchains/ARMCompiler_5.03_117_Windows"
GCC_ARM_PATH = "/usr/bin"

GCC_CS_PATH = "C:/Work/toolchains/Sourcery_CodeBench_Lite_for_ARM_EABI/bin"

GCC_CR_PATH = "C:/Work/toolchains/LPCXpresso_6.1.4_194/lpcxpresso/tools/bin"

IAR_PATH = "C:/Work/toolchains/iar_6_5/arm"
```

Note: Settings in ```private_settings.py``` will overwrite variables with default values in ```mbed/workspace_tools/settings.py``` file.


###**Build System**

The mbed build system is composed of two scripts:

- workspace_tools/build.py to build the libraries
- workspace_tools/make.py to build and run the test projects

Both share a subset of options to specify the target microcontroller and the toolchain:

> -m MCU -t TOOLCHAIN

If, for example, you want to build the mbed library for the LPC1768 mbed using the ARM GCC toolchain:

> python workspace_tools\build.py -m LPC1768 -t GCC_ARM

If you want to compile source files then issue the command in the root of 
project directory

> python workspace_tools\make.py -m LPC1768 -t GCC_ARM


### build.py script

It is the core script  to drive compilation, linking and building process for:

* mbed SDK (with libs like Ethernet, RTOS, USB, USB host).
* Tests which also can be linked with libraries like RTOS or Ethernet.

`Build.py` script is a powerful tool to build mbed SDK for all available platforms using all supported by mbed cross-compilers. S

```
$ python build.py --help
```

* The command line parameter ```-m``` specifies the ```MCUs/platforms ```for which you want to build the mbed SDK. More than one MCU(s)/platform(s) may be specified with this parameter using comma as delimiter.

Example for one platform build:
```
$ python build.py -m NUCLEO_F334R8 -t GCC_ARM
```
or for many platforms:
```
$ python build.py -m NUCLEO_F303RE,NUCLEO_F334R8 -t GCC_ARM
```
* Parameter ```-t``` defined which `toolchain` should be used for mbed SDK build. You can build Mbed SDK for multiple toolchains using one command. 

* Below example will compile mbed SDK for Freescale Freedom KL25Z platform using ARM and GCC_ARM compilers:
```
$ python build.py -m NUCLEO_F334R8 -t ARM,GCC_ARM
```
* You can combine this technique to compile multiple targets with multiple compilers.
```
$ python build.py -m NUCLEO_F303RE,NUCLEO_F334R8 -t GCC_ARM,ARM
```

* Building libraries included in mbed SDK's source code. Parameters ```-r```, ```-e```, ```-u```, ```-U```, ```-d```, ```-b``` will add ```RTOS```, ```Ethernet```, ```USB```, ```USB Host```, ```DSP```, ```U-Blox``` libraries respectively. 

Example
```
$ python build.py -m LPC1768 -t ARM -r -e
```
* You can be more verbose ```-v``` especially if you want to see each compilation / linking command build.py is executing:
```
$ python build.py -t GCC_ARM -m LPC1768 -j 8 -v
```


## Build Mbed SDK library from sources

We now should be ready to use workspace tools script ```build.py``` to compile and build mbed SDK from sources.

We are still using console. You should be already in ```mbed/workspace_tools/``` directory if not go to ```mbed/workspace_tools/``` and type below command:
```
$ python build.py -m LPC1768 -t ARM
```

or if you want to take advantage from multi-threaded compilation please use option ```-j X``` where ```X``` is number of cores you want to use to compile mbed SDK. See below:
```
$ python build.py -m LPC1768 -t ARM -j 4
```
Above command will build mbed SDK for [LPC1768](http://developer.mbed.org/platforms/mbed-LPC1768/) platform using ARM compiler.

Let's have a look at directory structure under ```mbed/build/```. We can see for ```LPC1768``` new directory ```TARGET_LPC1768``` was created. 

This directory contains all build primitives.
Directory ```mbed/TARGET_LPC1768/TOOLCHAIN_ARM_STD/``` contains mbed SDK library ```mbed.ar```. This directory structure also stores all needed headers which you should use with ```mbed.ar``` when building your own software.

**Note:** Workspace tools track changes in source code. So if for example mbed SDK or test source code changes ```build.py``` script will recompile project with all dependencies. 

If there are no changes in code consecutive mbed SDK re-builds using build.py will not rebuild project if this is not necessary. Try to run last command once again, we can see script ```build.py``` will not recompile project (there are no changes): 
```
$ python build.py -m LPC1768 -t ARM
```

## CppCheck analysis
[Cppcheck](http://cppcheck.sourceforge.net/) is a static analysis tool for C/C++ code. Unlike C/C++ compilers and many other analysis tools it does not detect syntax errors in the code. Cppcheck primarily detects the types of bugs that the compilers normally do not detect. The goal is to detect only real errors in the code (i.e. have zero false positives).

Prerequisites:

* Please install ```CppCheck``` on your system before you want to use it with build scripts.
* You should also add Cppcheck to your system path.

```build.py``` script supports switching between compilation, building and just static code analysis testing. You can use switch ```--cppcheck``` to perform CppCheck static code analysis. 

* When you are using --cppcheck switch all macros, toolchain dependencies etc. are preserved so you are sure you are checking exactly the same code you would compile for your application.

* Cppcheck analysis can take up to few minutes on slower machines.

* Usually you will use switches ```-t``` and ```-m``` to define toolchain and MCU (platform) respectively. You should do the same in case of CppCheck analysis. Please note that build script can also compile and build RTOS, Ethernet library etc. If you want to check those just use corresponding build script switches (e.g. ```-r```, ```-e```, ...).

Example:
```
$ python build.py -t uARM -m NUCLEO_F334R8 --cppcheck
```

## make.py script

```make.py``` is a ```mbed/workspace_tools/``` script used to build user defined projects

Note: ```make.py``` script depends on existing already built mbed SDK and library sources so you need to pre-build mbed SDK and other libraries (such as RTOS library) to link 'program' (test) with mbed SDK and RTOS library. To pre-build mbed SDK please use ```build.py``` script.

`make.py` shares  same  subset of options as `build.py` to specify the target microcontroller and the toolchain:

```
$ python make.py -t GCC_ARM -m K64F -n MBED_A3
```
Because we previously have built mbed SDK we are now able to drive test case compilation and linking with mbed SDK and produce ```MBED_A3``` test case binary in build directory:
```
C:\Work\mbed\build\test\K64F\GCC_ARM\MBED_A3\stl.bin
```
For more help type ```$ python make.py --help``` in your command line.


### **Directory Structure for User Defined Project **

|---mbed
|--- workspace---src---project---Makefile
|--- workspace---src---project---src
|--- workpace---src---project---Readme.md

###**Makefile**

<pre class="python">

DIRNAME=$(shell basename $(realpath ./))
MAKEFILE_PATH=$(realpath ../../../mbed/workspace_tools/make.py)
BUILD_DIR=$(realpath ../../build/)
SOURCE_PATH=$(realpath ./)
BUILD_PATH=$(BUILD_DIR)/$(DIRNAME)
MCU=NUCLEO_F334R8 #board or build profile name
TOOLCHAIN=GCC_ARM # tool chain
MCU_DIR=/run/media/anshuman/NUCLEO/
FLAGS="-D__STM__ -Wswitch"
all:
        $(MAKEFILE_PATH) --source=$(SOURCE_PATH) --build=$(BUILD_PATH) -m $(MCU) -t $(TOOLCHAIN) $(FLAGS) 

upload:
        cp  $(BUILD_PATH)/$(DIRNAME).bin $(MCU_DIR)

clean:
        rm -r $(BUILD_PATH)

help:
        $(MAKEFILE_PATH) --help

</pre>

To get started with a  new project,simple create a new sub directory in `workspace` and copy the Makefile .


###**References**

 - https://developer.mbed.org/handbook/mbed-tools
 - https://developer.mbed.org/teams/SDK-Development/wiki/Mbed-SDK-build-script-introduction
