---
layout: post
title: De-Compiling Android Application
category: Software
---

#### De-compiling Android Application ####

All applications for Android phones are distributed as APK Files. These files contain all the source,UI , images and other media necessary to run the application on your phone.

The decompilation process isn't perfect and the code you get won't reflect the original code 100%. Things like variable names, loop structures and anonymous inner classes might be interpreted differently especially if the application will obfuscate your code.

- Getting the APK File
 - Download the apk file from net of fetch it from the android phone
 - This command gives the list of installed apk files with associated path

	<pre class="brush:python"> 

	adb shell pm list packages -f -3 

	</pre>

	- This command will get the apk file on the PC

	<pre class="brush:python">

	adb pull /data/app/programming.apk 

	</pre>

	- Change file extension to .zip

	<pre class="brush:python">

	cp programming.apk programming.zip

	</pre>

	- Extract the contents of the file

	 <pre class="brush:python">

	 unzip programming.zip 

	 </pre>
		    
- Decompiling the code
	- Download [dex2jar](http://code.google.com/p/dex2jar/)  utility	  

 - Get the classes.dex file unzipped contents

	<pre class="brush:python">

	${PATH}/dex2jar/d2j-dex2jar.sh classes.dex 

	</pre>

 This will convert the dex to jar file and output will result in `classes_dex2jar.jar` file.
 
- Download java decompilers like [jd-gui ](http://jd.benow.ca/) or [Luyten](https://github.com/deathmarine/Luyten)

 - Open decompiler gui and open the jar file 		  
	For Lyuten type the command
	
	<pre class="brush:python">

	java -jar luyten.jar 

	</pre>

	you will be able to view all the sources of project,external jar files etc.
	
	- Save the source file
  - Select option File -> Save All Sources 
			 This will save all the files on the file system.

At this point the sources have been decompiled but not the resources etc

- Decompiling Resources
	- Download the latest version of [apktool](http://ibotpeaches.github.io/Apktool/) which is a tool for reverse engineering APK files. This tool dissassembles the code in Smali  format along with resources . We will user only resources obtained from this utility as java file had been obtained from earlier approach.

	<pre class="brush:python">
	
	java -jar apktool_2.0.0rc4.jar d programming.apk
	
	</pre>
    
    This will create programming folder containing source and resource files
    
At this point we have recovered both the source and resource files.

