---
layout: post
title: Docker Installation and setup on ubuntu OS
published: true
---

# **Introduction**

Docker is the world’s leading software container platform

An image is a lightweight, stand-alone, executable package that includes everything needed to run a piece of software, including the code, a runtime, libraries, environment variables, and config files.

A container is a runtime instance of an image – what the image becomes in memory when actually executed. It runs completely isolated from the host environment by default, only accessing host files and ports if configured to do so.

Using containers has a lot of advantages especially from DevOps point of view

- Using containers, everything required to make a piece of software run is packaged into isolated containers. Which makes replication of creation of run time environment for application very easy

- The purpose of containers is to provide efficient and lightweight self contained system which gurantees that the software will run regardless of where ever it is deployed.

- The container creation process also gurantees that several created containers are exactly identical.

- Images can be created from containers which stores the container state in its enterity

- The purpose of containers is not to bundle full operating system though you can do the same within a container.Which can be user to replicate the container instances

- The containers run applications natively on the hosts machine kernel each one running in a discrete process taking no more resources than any other executables.


# **Install Docker**

**Unistall old version**

Uninstall older versions of Docker were called docker or docker-engine. 

```
$ sudo apt-get remove docker docker-engine
```

The contents of `/var/lib/docker/`, including images, containers, volumes, and networks, are preserved. The Docker CE package is now called `docker-ce`, and the Docker EE package is now called `docker-ee`

**Recommended extra packages for Trusty 14.04.**

Install the `linux-image-extra-*` packages, which allow Docker to use the aufs storage drivers.

```
$ sudo apt-get update

$ sudo apt-get install \
    linux-image-extra-$(uname -r) \
    linux-image-extra-virtual
```

**Install Pre Requisites softwares**

```
$ sudo apt-get install \
    apt-transport-https \
    ca-certificates \
    curl \
    software-properties-common

```

**Add Docker’s official GPG key:**

```
curl -fsSL https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu/gpg | sudo apt-key add -
```

and verify that the key fingerprint is

```
9DC8 5822 9FC7 DD38 854A E2D8 8D81 803C 0EBF CD88
```

by running the following command

```
sudo apt-key fingerprint 0EBFCD88
```

**Adding the apt repository for docker**

```
sudo add-apt-repository \
   "deb [arch=amd64] https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu \
   $(lsb_release -cs) \
   stable"
		
sudo apt-get update

```

**Install docker**

```
sudo apt-get install docker-ce=<VERSION>
```

**Verify the docker installation **

Verify that Docker CE or Docker EE is installed correctly by running the hello-world image.

```
$ sudo docker run hello-world
```

This command downloads a test image and runs it in a container. When the container runs, it prints an informational message and exits.


**Uninstall docker**

To uninstall docker run the following command

```
sudo apt-get purge docker-ce
```

Images, containers, volumes, or customized configuration files on your host are not automatically removed. To delete all images, containers, and volumes:

```
$ sudo rm -rf /var/lib/docker
```

**Manage Docker as a non-root user**

The docker daemon binds to a Unix socket instead of a TCP port. By default that Unix socket is owned by the user root and other users can only access it using sudo. The docker daemon always runs as the root user.

If you don’t want to use sudo when you use the docker command, create a Unix group called docker and add users to it. When the docker daemon starts, it makes the ownership of the Unix socket read/writable by the docker group.

**Create Docker Group**

To create the docker group and add your user:

```
sudo groupadd docker
sudo usermod -aG docker $USER
```

Verify that you can run docker commands without sudo.

```
$ docker run hello-world
```

This command downloads a test image and runs it in a container. When the container runs, it prints an informational message and exits.

**Docker Boot configuration**

Most current Linux distributions (RHEL, CentOS, Fedora, Ubuntu 16.04 and higher) use systemd to manage which services start when the system boots. Ubuntu 14.10 and below use upstart.

To enable or disable docker start at boot for systemd run the following commands respectively

```
$ sudo systemctl enable docker
$ sudo systemctl disable docker
```

Docker is automatically configured to start on boot using upstart

To disable the behavior run the following command

```
echo manual | sudo tee /etc/init/docker.override
sudo chkconfig docker on
```

**Docker service**

To start and stop the docker daemon run the following commands

```
sudo service docker stop
sudo service docker start

or 

sudo systemctl start docker
sudo systemctl stop docker

```


# **References**

- https://www.docker.com/what-docker
- https://docs.docker.com/get-started/#a-brief-explanation-of-containers
- https://docs.docker.com/engine/installation/linux/ubuntu/#uninstall-docker
- https://docs.docker.com/engine/installation/linux/linux-postinstall/#your-kernel-does-not-support-cgroup-swap-limit-capabilities
- https://docs.docker.com/get-started/#setup
- 